# Decryption Analysis and Encryption
🤖🔑 midterm hackathon!

_Oct. 27 - Oct. 31, 2025_ \
**due: Fri. Oct. 31 @ 5:59pm NYC-time 🎃** \
**➡️👯 [TEAMS
LIST!](https://airtable.com/appNisQAaK2SV4aoi/shr78Ij1QAOiTCKPn/tblOhGY29sUGqhPVK)**

![400-DALL·E 2024-10-20 21 53 16 - A photorealistic image of two lifelike
cats wearing subtle 90s-style cyberpunk enhancements, such as glowing
visors or small tech accessories, trying
copy](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3ca3ff98-a328-4e57-9178-74dd71a9b028)

Your team's task is to write 1 C++ program that performs different
cryptographic tasks for Alice and Bob:

### 1. 📊 Decryption + Analysis

Your team will be given an encrypted text in the `midterm` folder of the
Github. Your task is to write code that helps decrypt the text. The text
has been encrypted by Alice using a **Vigenère cipher**. The letters have
been placed into groups of 4 so that the word breaks are disguised. The
**key** is one of the words listed in a file called `keys.txt` in the
Github. This file is also uploaded in the zyBooks lab.

This part of your program should output:
- a **frequency analysis** showing the counts of every letter of your team's encrypted text
- the correct original (decrypted) English plaintext
- the correct key that you discovered

On the backend, your program's logic should suggest to the user which key is most likely correct, given what you know.
The approaches for this range from simple to highly sophisticated (_partial credit will be awarded here for attempts_) ... 

Remember, research is encouraged here! You might want
to start with this video about [**polyalphabetic
ciphers**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BgFJD7oCmDE&list=PLSQl0a2vh4HA50QhFIirlEZRXG4yjcoGM&index=7).
(_highly recommended_)

### 2. 🔒 Encryption

Your program should take an input text from your user, and then encrypt
that text **with an encryption algorithm of your own design.** The steps
of your encryption need to be reversible; for example, if Alice encrypts
the message and Bob knows the key, Bob should be able to decrypt it.

Your program should output the encrypted text and the key. Other
requirements:
- your encryption should make use of a pseudorandom number generator **of
your own design** - not `rand()`
- you might start by watching this video about the [**one-time
pad**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FlIG3TvQCBQ&list=PLSQl0a2vh4HA50QhFIirlEZRXG4yjcoGM&index=9).
How can you make use of this method?
- your method can have multiple layers and operations - is there a
substitution step? Is there another shift performed after? Creativity will
be rewarded!
- the goal here is _not_ to pull in someone else's pre-existing algorithm,
but to create your own with your team, using math that you know. Remember,
encryption is just scrambling data with math.

### Program Design

Your program should be in 1 `cpp` file. Your user should be able to choose
which task (Part 1 analysis/decryption, or Part 2 encryption) that they
want to perform, like a menu of options.

Beyond these requirements listed, the implementation is up to you!

### Groundrules

- Your team can delegate the work however you choose - but every team
member should be able to explain the code by the end of the week, and
everyone needs to submit a full program, so you need to combine and share
your work.
- You may need research for this project - but the goal here is to use the
**skills you have learned in this class** already. If you are using code
that you do not understand or seeking out new libraries in order to build
this program, your team should re-think the approach!
- You may use any source available, _as long as you cite_. This includes
the Internet, zyBooks and other books, _light use_ of AI tools, other
people in the class, etc. Please use the [course
guidelines](https://github.com/mab253/cpp_fall25/blob/main/ai-citations.md)
for how to do this with comments in your code. **When in doubt, comment and cite.**
- You will not lose points for researching and using other sources with
citation. You **will lose points** for seeking out code generated by
others (people or bots) as a _significant portion of your solution_. I may
ask your team to explain any line of your code. You may also lose points
for using methods beyond the scope of this class without citation and an
explanation of your reasoning.

### Evaluation

Your team's program will be evaluated on:
- functionality: does your program run smoothly without error? does it
make sense for the user to run?
- completeness: does your program perform all the tasks?
- creativity: does your methodology show original work? is the frontend experience of the program unique?
- style: can we read your code?! is your spacing and indentation legible?
are you using loops and vectors where you can avoid repetition? etc.

Every project will be graded as a whole, and then based on a final
submission form where you discuss your week and the division of labor,
every individual will get a midterm grade as well.

### Platforms & Submission

You may want to use [USACO IDE](https://ide.usaco.guide/), [work@](https://workat.tech/), [glot.io](https://glot.io/new/cpp), [online cpp](https://www.online-cpp.com/), [cpp.sh](https://cpp.sh/), or your own text editor to develop and
code together. ([Zed](https://zed.dev/docs/collaboration) and VSCode both have collaborative features, if you are already working with these tools.)
Your final submission should be in zyBooks, section 16.41. You can always code in the zyBooks lab as well to develop your work.

- The zyBooks lab should accept your code no matter what - for this
project, there is no feedback from unit or output tests! You can submit as
many times as you need before the deadline.

- **Each team member** needs to submit code via zyBooks 16.41, even if
your team's code is exactly the same.
- Every person needs to fill out an evaluation form with some individual questions, also by the deadline. I will post this before Friday

👽 Good luck!

